Dental plaque is a biofilm
formed from bacteria in your mouth.
It starts to form within a couple of
minutes on a freshly polished tooth.
Once the bacteria stick to teeth,
they bind to other bacteria in your mouth.
The larger the mass of bacteria becomes,
the more bacteria it can hold onto
and the thicker the plaque becomes.
When you brush your teeth,
you disrupt the biofilm and
colonies of microbes,
and the process begins again.
Anywhere the plaque is not removed,
the bacteria mass continues to grow
and the more complicated the mix of bacteria becomes.
The bacteria in plaque produce
acid from carbohydrates in your mouth,
which eats away at tooth enamel
Calcium, phosphorous, and fluoride molecules in your saliva
replace the minerals lost from your teeth by acid.
But over time, more minerals are lost
than can be replaced.
Enamel is worn away,
and tartar begins to form.